# Licenses

The PiDP-8/I software distribution is an agglomeration of software from
multiple sources.  Several different licenses apply to its parts.  This
file guides you to those individual licenses.


## SIMH License

Most of the files in this software distribution are released under the
terms of the SIMH license, a copy of which typically appears at the top
of each file it applies to. This includes not only SIMH proper but also
several files written by PiDP-8/I software project contributors who
chose to license their contributions under the same license.

For a few files, textual inclusion of the license inside the file itself
was impractical, so this license is applied by reference to [a file
included with the distribution][sl].

[sl]: https://tangentsoft.com/pidp8i/doc/trunk/SIMH-LICENSE.md


## autosetup License

The `configure` script and the contents of the `autosetup` directory are
released under the FreeBSD license given in [`autosetup/LICENSE`][as].

[as]: https://tangentsoft.com/pidp8i/doc/trunk/autosetup/LICENSE


## palbart License

The `palbart` program and its manual page are released under the terms
of the license given in [`palbart/LICENSE.md`][pl].

[pl]: https://tangentsoft.com/pidp8i/doc/trunk/palbart/LICENSE.md


## OS/8 License

The OS/8 media images included with this software distribution are
released under the Digital License Agreement presented in
[`media/os8/LICENSE.md`][dla].

[dla]: https://tangentsoft.com/pidp8i/doc/trunk/media/os8/LICENSE.md


## Other DEC Software

The other files in the [`media`][md] and [`examples`][ed] directories
that originate from Digital Equipment Corporation are believed to fall
under the [public domain license][pdp8pd] DEC released all their PDP-8
software under after it stopped being ecomonmically viable. Documented
releases for specific software (e.g. TSS/8) may be difficult to come by,
however.

[md]: https://tangentsoft.com/pidp8i/dir?ci=trunk&name=media
[ed]: https://tangentsoft.com/pidp8i/dir?ci=trunk&name=examples


## ETOS License

ETOS was a commercial product produced outside of DEC. No public
documented declaration of license is known to be available for it, but
we have [a third-hand report][el] that its creators are fine with ETOS
being redistributed.

[el]: http://mailman.trailing-edge.com/pipermail/simh/2017-January/016169.html
